The Handful of Commands I Use When Interactive Rebasing with Vim
VIM, git, learning, thisweekilearned 

This week I expanded my VIM knowledge a bit, to make my rebasing life a little bit easier. Although VIM is not my default editing workspace, I use it for a few things, so that if I find myself in a scenario where I _have_ to use it I'm not completely lost. I primarily use it for commit messages and rebasing, and get by efficiently enough with my basic VIM knowledge.

I've been interactive rebasing a lot lately to update commits, so I'm often finding myself with a `git log` that looks something like this:

```
477cd5f 2020-05-14 Noel Worden fix - merge into Commit A
1487595 2020-05-14 Noel Worden FAM-225: Commit B
d9bf948 2020-05-14 Noel Worden FAM-197: Commit A
```

Which means when I enter an interactive rebase looks like this:

```
pick d9bf948 FAM-197: Commit A
pick 1487595 FAM-225: Commit B
pick 477cd5f fix - merge into Commit A
```

Basically, I need to move `477cd5f fix - merge into Commit A` up one line. The 'old', crunky way I had been doing it was to go into `insert` mode, add a new line, type out `fixup` and the SHA, then go down and hit the `delete` key a bunch of times to the original commit line:

```
pick d9bf948 FAM-197: Commit A
fixup 477cd5f << manually type this
pick 1487595 FAM-225: Commit B
pick 477cd5f fix - merge into Commit A << come back and manually delete this
```

It did the job, but I knew there was a better way. And, heres that better way:

`jjddkP`

Yup, thats it. A few taps of the keyboard does what took me a good 15 seconds or more when trying to do it all in `insert` mode. 

Heres a breakdown:

`j` and `k` are directional keys (up/down) along with `h` and `l` (left/right); the `dd` and `P` commands are where the real action is: 

`jj` - move down two lines
`dd` - delete the current line, and store in clipboard
`k` - move up one line
`P` - put (paste) from clipboard before cursor (note that it's an uppercase `P`)

That gets the line moved up to where it needs to be, but I'm usually rebasing to merge work into an existing commit, so I use `fixup` (or just `f`) to drop the commit message of the commit. That can be done with three key strokes: 

`cwf`

The breakdown:

`cw` - change word from current cursor position
`f` - `fixup` -> like `squash`, but discard this commit's log message

And this is the result of those handful of commands:

```
pick d9bf948 FAM-197: Commit A
f 477cd5f fix - merge into Commit A
pick 1487595 FAM-225: Commit B
```

Which is exactly what I need, and _much_ faster than my original 'all insert' method. 

This is how I have found I best learn things like hot keys or shortcuts; instead of memorizing entire sheets of hotkeys, I  introduce small chunks of shortcuts as I need them. The internet is full of VIM cheatsheets, I like [this](https://vim.rtorr.com/) one in particular. I also find that searching the internet for my specific need can be a good way to find solutions quickly. 

------

This post is part of an ongoing *This Week I Learned* [series](https://dev.to/noelworden/beginning-of-a-blog-series-5aj3). I welcome any critique, feedback, or suggestions in the comments.
