Keeping Files from Being Tracked Without `.gitignore`
git, productivity, thisweekilearned, dotfiles

This week I picked up a little gem around keeping files out of git.

I had made some tasks via VSCode and in doing so it created a `.vscode` file in the workspace. Git picked up this new file, so I instinctively went for `.gitignore`. I added `.vscode` with a small comment, committed, and pushed up a PR. 

A colleague pointed out that `.gitignore` wasn't the best place for this file, because it was developer environment-specific and not project-specific. But he didn't stop there, he pointed me to _another_ git dotfile that I didn't know existed!

Before I get into that dotfile, a little refresher on accessing dotfiles. If you're navigating to this file via the terminal, the basic `ls` command won't show dotfiles, it needs to be appended with `-a`, so the command is `ls -a`.

If you're on a Mac and navigating via the Finder, by default you won't see dotfiles either. Here's a one-liner you can run in terminal to show the dotfiles:

```
defaults write com.apple.finder AppleShowAllFiles YES; killall Finder /System/Library/CoreServices/Finder.app  
```

There are actually two actions happening in that command, the first is telling the OS to set `AppleShowAllFiles` to `YES`.

```
defaults write com.apple.finder AppleShowAllFiles YES
```

And the second is restarting the Finder app. When it completes the restart it will show all dotfiles, system-wide.

```
killall Finder /System/Library/CoreServices/Finder.app
```

Ok, now, back to the git stuff.

When a git repository has been created, with `git init`, it installs this `.git` folder, which contains everything git needs to track files, run hooks, etc. A little buried in that folder is a file titled `exclude`, found at this path:

`.git > info > exclude`

That `exclude` file basically acts as a `.gitignore`, but at a local level. So, in my case I just added `.vscode`, and, like git magic, it's ignored in my tracked files.

------

This post is part of an ongoing *This Week I Learned* [series](https://dev.to/noelworden/beginning-of-a-blog-series-5aj3). I welcome any critique, feedback, or suggestions in the comments.



