A Rabbit Hole of Decimal Formatting

This week I learned a little something about cleaning up decimals for html. The TL;DR of this post is that **Decimal's** `to_string/2` function has an option `:xsd` that converts the decimal to `canonical representation`, which in effect cleans the number of trailing zeros, without rounding. 

The situation was that for a new index page we were showing a record's decimal converted to a percentage. Off the cuff, it was simple logic: `decimal * 100`. But, we are pulling in data from excel sheets and at the moment all data is being cast as strings, so we have to use `Decimal` to convert and perform the multiplication: `Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast(decimal), 100)`. Still, relatively simple logic, except for the way `Decimal` displays the result, based on the amount of non-zeros to the left of the decimal point of the input: 

```
iex> Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8"), 100)
#Decimal<80.0>

iex> Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.87"), 100)
#Decimal<87.00>
```

For me that inconsistency was the deal breaker, and the slide down the slippery slope of how to show the user a consistent percentage on the index page. Maybe it's just me, but it seems lazy to show one result with a single zero after the decimal, and then, for no apparent reason to the user, show another result with double zeros after the decimal. Initially, the solution seemed obvious, _just slap a `round` on it_ so that everything would have double zeros after the decimal.

```
iex> Decimal.round(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8"), 100), 2)
#Decimal<80.00>

iex> Decimal.round(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.87"), 100), 2)
#Decimal<87.00>
```

Done, mic drop, Im off to get some coffee. I was confident in this solution because I had seen a lot of this data and had not seen it ever _not_ be a whole number. This solution also allowed accuracy out to the hundredth position, which I felt would cover our bases. But, before I could even leave my desk to get my celebratory coffee, a colleague raised the now obvious question "what about a number with a long decimal, do we really want to round that?". Although I had seen the data and was confident about the assumption of whole numbers, she was 100% right to bring up the edge case, and if we wanted to handle this decimal _right_ we had to account for a long decimal.

I'll skip passed the long discussion and get right to the good stuff. Someone suggested `Decimal.to_string/2` with `:xsd` passed as an option, and its a great solution. In the [docs](https://hexdocs.pm/decimal/Decimal.html#to_string/2) it states that passing `:xsd` will _convert the number to the canonical XSD representation_. Welp, I had no idea what that meant, so I dug into it further. The docs link to [W3 xml decimal documentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#decimal) and the takeaway from that is _... Leading and trailing zeroes are prohibited..._. Basically, a canonical representation will remove any unnecessary leading and trailing zeroes, effectively "cleaning up" a decimal. 

```
iex> Decimal.to_string(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8"), 100), :xsd)
"80.0"

iex> Decimal.to_string(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.87"), 100), :xsd)
"87.0"
```

And to see some more extreme examples, heres how a simple `Decimal.mult` handles multiple zeroes after the decimal:

```
iex> Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8700"), 100)
#Decimal<87.0000>

iex> Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8700000"), 100)
#Decimal<87.0000000>
```

And the cleanup with `:xsd`:

```
iex> Decimal.to_string(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8700000"), 100), :xsd)
"87.0"
```

And, if the digits to the right aren't zeroes:

```
iex> Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8765309"), 100)
#Decimal<87.6530900>
```

Note the two unnecessary zeroes at the end. Now that same decimal as a canonical representation:

```
iex> Decimal.to_string(Decimal.mult(Decimal.cast("0.8765309"), 100), :xsd)
"87.65309"
```

For this purpose, canonical representation is the best of both worlds. The decimal has unnecessary zeroes dropped, but also displays the decimal as accurately as possible. It is definitely a bit _odd_ to have to convert a string to a decimal, perform the math, and ultimately change it back into a string, but life isn't perfect and this is the data we are working with. 

------

This post is part of an ongoing *This Week I Learned* [series](https://dev.to/noelworden/beginning-of-a-blog-series-5aj3). I welcome any critique, feedback, or suggestions in the comments.
